
# Ren Protocol

## Presentation
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vRShdxMQ-eDkK1fMJRLsCixqUnX2MTctZldP4hVV41S3XcQ6LrWV71Vl88WA2fGU5Co4pT8MxBrnG6V/pub?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000


##    Carl Boitz

One of the most interesting players in the new field of decentralized finance (DeFi) is a startup based out of Singapore called Ren Protocol. Formerly named Republic Protocol, Ren was founded in 2017 by Taiyang Zhang and Loong Wang in response to the absence of dark pools in the crypto ecosystem and the need for a decentralized crypto exchange for privacy. Ren protocol is looking to fill a niche in the market for interoperability of blockchain liquidity, allowing users to trade cross chain in the privacy of  dark pools. They recently opened their own dark pool named MainNet where they can facilitate atomic swaps with the dark nodes created so far. This company is an up and coming innovator that is using advances in technology to lead the way for future investors to place big bets  in the crypto space.
	Tai and Loong first met at their alma mater, Australian National University in Canberra where they studied computer science together. They had briefly worked at the same startup doing big data analytics. After realizing their potential, they proceeded to start their own company called Neucode, a software development agency where they worked on projects for government agencies, logicstics & geospatial projects(1)   After this venture, Taiyang co-founded a crypto trading fund called Virgil Capital. At Virgil, Tai wrote the quantitative trading strategies  that would be used. Being the architect for the systems of this quant fund was the introduction to the crypto space for Tai, and where he was first introduced  to Ethereum and smart contracts.
	Loong Wang started his career focused on distributing systems. This was his passion going into university and where he learned about concurrency and this started his attraction to the crypto space. When Taizhang approached him about working together again, these two found it easy to start a company that would later be called Ren Protocol.(1)
	While trading for Virgil Capital, Taizhang realized the need for dark pools in the crypto space. Finding the best price for your exchange is a main reason for the adoption of dark pools, and although they are prevalent in the public markets, there has yet to be a dominant dark pool exchange for crypto. Ren saw the inefficiency in the marketplace and the need for a decentralized exchange. Dark Pools account for more than half of all trade volume in Equities and Forex markets. This liquidity is not only attractive for traders looking to fill orders, but also can be very profitable for the owners of the space. The ability to be the dominant space in this domain is still open, but Ren has started their way to becoming an early front runner. 
Dark Pools have been a very controversial part of Wall St. for years. Although they have been around for decades, it was not until recently that this hidden world of trading has come into the eye of the public. With the help of Michael Lewis’ Flash Boys and Scott Patterson’s Dark Pools, the general public was made aware of these hidden, anonymous exchanges where large blocks of orders were executed out of the public eye. Usually when an investor wants to buy a large block of shares, the investor would have to go through a public exchange where his order would be available for the world to see. These public order books would be the culmination of every buy and sell order out on the market at that particular moment. This could be detrimental to the investor, because this large order could move the stock price drastically, not allowing the investor to get the best price for his client or broker (slippage). Dark Pools were created to allow these institutional investors the ability of placing large block orders on publicly traded stocks with anonymity and hidden from public order books . No one could see who was selling, who was buying  or how much till this information came out much later. This lack of transparency created a whole world of questions, as well as an opportunity for high frequency traders.
 High frequency traders are a relatively new concept, coming about in 2008 and hittin prominence in 2010 with The Flash Crash on May 6th, 2010. These HFTs would “front run” market orders where they would literally jump ahead of a market order placed by the investor, buy the stock intended for the investor and sell it to him at a higher price before he could even blink.  This could shave fractions of a penny or even wholes cents off the price which if done thousands of times a day could lead to a fortune for the HFT, and money out of the pocket of the investor. The anonymity of dark pools created a playground for HFTs because of the possible wide spreads between the bid and ask. 
“A broker was expected to find the best possible price in the market for his customers. The Goldman Sachs dark pool - to take one example - was less than 2 percent of the entire stock market. So why did nearly 50 percent of the customers orders routed into Goldman’s dark pool end up being executed inside that pool - rather than out in the wider market? Most of the broker’s dark pools constituted less than 1 percent of the entire market, and yet somehow those brokers found the best price for their customers between 15 and 60 percent of the time. And because the dark pool was not required to say exactly when it had sent the order, and the broker did not typically tell his investors where it had executed the trade, much less the market conditions at the moment of execution, the customer lived in darkness.” (2)
 The reason why HFTs are able to front run orders is because they are first run through a centralized system. All orders in the publicly traded markets are run through centralized public exchanges like BATS, NASDAQ and NYSE. These exchanges receive every public order, and unfortunately HFTs figured out that by sheer speed they were able to front run these stocks and shave pennies off the price. By using dark pools, the HFTs found every larger spreads could be filled between the bid/ask without anyone knowing. Although this is a huge problem, one of the ways to combat this is with a decentralized exchange. Cryptocurrencies are built on  decentralized ledgers, where no one location holds the public order book, instead peer to peer exchanges can happen through atomic swaps, a device for cross chain exhanges which will be explained later.
	Cryptocurrency was created as a revolt against centralized fiat currencies that were tied to governments or monetary institutions. After the 2008 bailout of the major banks by the U.S. government and the ensuing Great Recession, the public lost trust in the monetary policies across the globe. Whether it was the Fed creating money out of thin air or countries like Greece and their economic implosion, an alternative cryptocurrency that was not linked to any centralized government became appealing. After the inception of a decentralized form of money called cyrptocurrency, many people tried to figure out how they could trade these cryptocurrencies between buyers and sellers, also they were looking to exchange their fiat currencies into crypto assets. This led to the creation of  a third party that would help conduct these transactions. Centralized exchanges were not only the “middle man” between buyers and sellers, but they stored user’s crypto assets in safe accounts, much like a bank. But also like banks, this put a huge target on their backs and were victims of hackers breaking in and stealing millions of dollars of cryptocurrency. One of the more popular hacks was of Mt.Gox, a crypto exchange that at its peak handled nearly 70% of all bitcoin transactions. Starting in 2011, Mt. Gox was hacked into and nearly 650 million dollars of crypto assets were stolen from the exchange and eventually led to the bankruptcy of Mt. Gox. This shook the crypto-world and demands for decentralized exchanges became louder and louder. This created a marketplace for decentralized exchanges that conducted peer to peer exchanges using smart contracts and atomic swaps(4) Ren wanted to create a space where the order book could be hidden, allowing large block orders to take place in anonymity as well as decentralized to allow peer to peer transactions to occur without the centralized exchange aspect. This would allow complete privacy of the large transactions in a space that cannot be easily hacked.
	The key to decentralized exchanges it their ability to facilitate peer to peer exchanges without the need for a “middle man”. A device called an atomic swap is used to create these peer to peer exchanges. These exchanges can even be done cross chain, allowing for different coins to be traded. Atomic swaps use a key called Hash Time Lock Contracts (HTLCs), allow users to make transactions that would typically be made on-chain to make them off-chain, or off the public order books(6). Once on the dark pool, the transaction is broken up into smaller orders by use of the Shamir Secret Sharing System.
	Shamir’s Secret Sharing algorithm is used in cryptocurrency to allow a transaction to occur in smaller parts that lead to the sum of the transaction. In the dark pool, the encryption key  would be considered the secret, and would be broken up into many small fragments of the sum, called shares. These shares are then guided by dark nodes found in the dark pool to the other side of this transaction, to the person who knows the “secret”. Once the receiver of  the dark nodes obtains the minimum number of shares needed to break the threshold, they can unlock the encryption key and complete the transaction on the HTLC. Use of HTLCs and Shamir’s Secret Sharing algorithm are two of the most innovative technology that Ren Protocol is using. Currently on Ren, you must obtain 66% of the dark nodes in order to unlock the “secret” and complete the transaction.
Currently Ren Protocol supports trades between Bitcoin, Ether and ERC20. The reason for the limited number of supported coins is due to liquidity. These coins have the highest level of liquidity and would make sense to allow these to be supported on the platform. If someone wanted to trade another coin on the Ren platform, it would make more sense to find a centralized platform. This sort of limited trading ability gives a clear view of who this platform was designed for. This is not a brokerage for small time traders, the REN Protocol is a platform designed for large investors looking to place orders with minimal market impact.(3) 	
One of the more standard rules among exchanges is that “liquidity breeds liquidity”, meaning that if Ren Protocol can obtain the majority of liquidity in the dark pool space, they can become a humongous component of the crypto ecosystem. This would cause them to be the main avenue for dark pool trading, which has become an integral part of institutional investing. Billions of dollars are exchanged in dark pools every year, so to become the lion’s share of liquidity would be incredibly profitable for Ren Protocol. Multiple financial institutions would users of their dark pool and it would only attract more institutional players as well as “whales” or high value crypto traders.      
 Ren recently finished a public Initial Coin Offering of their Ren Token in February of 2018. During their ICO they managed to reach their fundraising goal of $34.4 million USD by selling 1 billion tokens. As of today it currently has a market cap of almost $46 million dollars, with the average daily volume exchanging about $8 million a day. Currently the REN token is being traded at $0.0575 REN/USD (5). During their ICO they managed to raise around 5 million dollars from their public ICO and around $30million from their private presale.	Some of their biggest investors to date are FBG Capital, a digital asset management firm in the blockchain based capital market based in Beijing. As well as Polychain Capital, a cryptocurrency hedge fund. They also have their hometown based Signum Capital, a Singapore based firm that consults Blockchain-enabled companies. (8)
It was reported that at the end of the September 2018, Ren Protocol’s 200 testnet darknodes earned an estimated 21,700 in fees over 2 months (7).
While the crypto space is still considered very new, many would consider Ren Protocol to be in a fledgling stage. Although there is much potential for the technology, it is still limited by its infancy. Ren has expressed the desire to expand the number of coins it can sustain on the platform. This would be one of the ways that Ren Protocol could become more attractive as an investment. With liquidity in coins leading which ones can be supported on the platform, there is no need to guess which ones should be chosen. As Ren Protocol expands its network of supported coins, the next avenue for growth would be speed. Atomic swaps can be considered tricky, with technology advancing every day, a more automated and efficient strategy of opening payment channels can become adopted and expedite the transfers of these block orders. Ren Protocol must be sure to stay on top of developing technology to ensure its validity as a player in the market. 
In conclusion, Ren Protocol is an incredibly interesting company to watch progress. In the last 3 years since its inception it has grown exponentially and will continue to do so. From the development of MainNet and the expansion of Defi in the crypto space, there is an interesting future for Ren Protocol ahead as dark pools will become an increasingly integral part of  the cryptocurrency ecosystem.

Resources

1. https://epicenter.tv/episode/230/ Podcast interviewing Taiyang Zhang and Loong Wang of REN
2. Michael Lewis, Flash Boys. Pg 86 chapter 3 “Ronan’s Problem”
3. https://www.coinbureau.com/review/republic-protocol-ren
https://www.investopedia.com/tech/what-are-centralized-cryptocurrency-exchanges/
4.https://medium.com/renproject/renvm-testnet-launch-bringing-interoperability-to-defi-1793938ea0cf
5. https://icodrops.com/republic-protocol/

6. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkXUz3UFn6Y
7. https://medium.com/@aenigmacapital/republic-protocol-ren-investment-research-a0385778f01c
8.https://cryptogems.com/ren-protocol-the-ren-token-and-the-underlying-dark-pool-exchange-protocol-explained/
